apps/docs/content/docs/extensions/manifest.mdx, before:

---
title: Extension Manifest
description: Complete guide to configuring your extension with manifest.json
icon: FileText
---

# Extension Manifest

The `manifest.json` file is the heart of every Rua extension. It defines your extension's metadata, capabilities, permissions, and how it integrates with the Rua ecosystem.

## Basic Structure

Every extension must include a `manifest.json` file in its root directory:

```json
{
  "id": "author.extension-name",
  "name": "My Extension",
  "version": "1.0.0",
  "description": "A helpful extension for Rua",
  "rua": {
    "engineVersion": "^0.4.0",
    "ui": {
      "entry": "dist/index.html"
    },
    "actions": [
      {
        "name": "main",
        "title": "My Action",
        "mode": "view",
        "keywords": ["my", "action"],
        "icon": "tabler:star"
      }
    ]
  },
  "permissions": ["clipboard", "storage"]
}
```

## Required Fields

### Basic Metadata

**Identity Configuration:**
```json
{
  "id": "author.extension-name",
  "name": "My Extension"
}
```

**id**: Unique identifier for your extension
- Format: `author.extension-name` or `extension-name`
- Must be lowercase with hyphens
- Cannot be changed after publication

**name**: Human-readable extension name
- Displayed in the extension manager
- Should be descriptive and concise

**Versioning Configuration:**
```json
{
  "version": "1.0.0"
}
```

**version**: Semantic version number
- Format: `MAJOR.MINOR.PATCH`
- Used for update detection
- Must follow [semver](https://semver.org/) specification

**Description Configuration:**
```json
{
  "description": "A helpful extension for Rua"
}
```

**description**: Brief explanation of what your extension does
- Shown in extension store and manager
- Keep under 100 characters
- Should clearly explain the extension's purpose

### Rua Configuration

The `rua` object contains Rua-specific configuration:

```json
{
  "rua": {
    "engineVersion": "^0.4.0",
    "ui": {
      "entry": "dist/index.html"
    },
    "background": {
      "entry": "dist/init.js"
    },
    "actions": [...],
    "settings": {...}
  }
}
```

#### Engine Version

```json
{
  "engineVersion": "^0.4.0"
}
```

Specifies the minimum Rua version required:
- Use semver ranges (`^0.4.0`, `>=0.4.0`, `~0.4.0`)
- Ensures compatibility with Rua features
- Extensions won't load on incompatible versions

#### UI Configuration

```json
{
  "ui": {
    "entry": "dist/index.html",
    "width": 600,
    "height": 400,
    "resizable": true,
    "theme": "auto"
  }
}
```

**entry**: Path to the main HTML file for view extensions
**width/height**: Default window dimensions (optional)
**resizable**: Whether the extension window can be resized
**theme**: Default theme (`light`, `dark`, `auto`)

#### Background Script

```json
{
  "background": {
    "entry": "dist/init.js",
    "persistent": true
  }
}
```

**entry**: Path to the background script
**persistent**: Whether the script should stay loaded (default: true)

## Actions Configuration

Actions define how users can interact with your extension:

### Basic Action

```json
{
  "name": "search",
  "title": "Search Files",
  "mode": "view",
  "keywords": ["search", "find", "files"],
  "icon": "tabler:search"
}
```

### Action Properties

**Core Properties:**
- **name**: Unique identifier for the action
  - Used internally to identify the action
  - Must be unique within the extension

- **title**: Display name for the action
  - Shown in search results
  - Should be descriptive and concise

- **keywords**: Array of search terms
  - Used for fuzzy matching
  - Include synonyms and related terms

**UI Properties:**
- **icon**: Icon identifier
  - Format: `tabler:icon-name` for Tabler icons
  - Format: `lucide:icon-name` for Lucide icons
  - Custom icons: `./path/to/icon.svg`

- **description**: Optional detailed description
  - Shown in search results
  - Provides additional context

**Behavior Properties:**
- **mode**: How the action behaves
  - `view`: Opens a custom UI
  - `command`: Executes immediately
  - `background`: Runs in background

- **query**: Whether to show query input
  - `true`: Shows input box for user queries
  - `false`: No input (default)

### Action Modes

#### View Mode

Opens a custom user interface:

```json
{
  "name": "calculator",
  "title": "Calculator",
  "mode": "view",
  "keywords": ["calc", "math", "calculator"],
  "icon": "tabler:calculator",
  "query": true
}
```

**Use Cases**:
- Custom search interfaces
- Configuration panels
- Interactive tools
- Data visualization

#### Command Mode

Executes immediately without UI:

```json
{
  "name": "timestamp",
  "title": "Copy Timestamp",
  "mode": "command",
  "keywords": ["time", "timestamp", "date"],
  "icon": "tabler:clock"
}
```

**Use Cases**:
- Quick utilities
- System commands
- Data transformations
- Clipboard operations

#### Background Mode

Runs in the background process:

```json
{
  "name": "monitor",
  "title": "System Monitor",
  "mode": "background",
  "keywords": ["system", "monitor", "stats"],
  "icon": "tabler:activity"
}
```

**Use Cases**:
- System monitoring
- Automated tasks
- Data collection
- Background processing

### Query Support

Enable query input for user-provided data:

```json
{
  "name": "web-search",
  "title": "Search Web",
  "mode": "view",
  "keywords": ["web", "search", "google"],
  "icon": "tabler:world",
  "query": true,
  "queryPlaceholder": "Enter search terms..."
}
```

When `query: true`, users can type before selecting your action:
- The query is passed to your extension
- Listen for `search-change` events in your code
- Use for search, calculations, or any user input

## Permissions System

Permissions control what system APIs your extension can access:

### Simple Permissions

```json
{
  "permissions": [
    "clipboard",
    "notification", 
    "storage",
    "http"
  ]
}
```

### Detailed Permissions

For fine-grained control, use detailed permission objects:

```json
{
  "permissions": [
    "clipboard",
    {
      "permission": "fs:read",
      "allow": [
        { "path": "$HOME/Documents/**" },
        { "path": "$HOME/Downloads/**" }
      ]
    },
    {
      "permission": "shell",
      "allow": [
        {
          "cmd": {
            "program": "git",
            "args": ["status", "log", "diff"]
          }
        }
      ]
    }
  ]
}
```

### Available Permissions

**Basic Permissions:**
- **clipboard**: Read and write clipboard content
  ```json
  "clipboard"
  ```

- **storage**: Local data persistence
  ```json
  "storage"
  ```

- **notification**: Show system notifications
  ```json
  "notification"
  ```

**File System Permissions:**
- **fs:read**: Read files
  ```json
  {
    "permission": "fs:read",
    "allow": [
      { "path": "$HOME/Documents/**" }
    ]
  }
  ```

- **fs:write**: Write files
  ```json
  {
    "permission": "fs:write", 
    "allow": [
      { "path": "$HOME/temp/**" }
    ]
  }
  ```

- **fs:read-dir**: List directory contents
- **fs:exists**: Check if files exist
- **fs:stat**: Get file metadata

**Network Permissions:**
- **http**: Make HTTP requests
  ```json
  {
    "permission": "http",
    "allow": [
      { "url": "https://api.example.com/**" }
    ]
  }
  ```

**System Permissions:**
- **shell**: Execute shell commands
  ```json
  {
    "permission": "shell",
    "allow": [
      {
        "cmd": {
          "program": "echo",
          "args": [".+"]
        }
      }
    ]
  }
  ```

### Path Variables

Use these variables in file system permissions:

- `$HOME`: User's home directory
- `$DESKTOP`: Desktop directory
- `$DOCUMENTS`: Documents directory
- `$DOWNLOADS`: Downloads directory
- `$PICTURES`: Pictures directory
- `$MUSIC`: Music directory
- `$VIDEOS`: Videos directory

## Extension Settings

Define configurable settings for your extension:

```json
{
  "rua": {
    "settings": {
      "apiKey": {
        "type": "string",
        "title": "API Key",
        "description": "Your service API key",
        "default": "",
        "required": true,
        "secret": true
      },
      "maxResults": {
        "type": "number",
        "title": "Maximum Results",
        "description": "Number of results to show",
        "default": 10,
        "min": 1,
        "max": 100
      },
      "enableNotifications": {
        "type": "boolean",
        "title": "Enable Notifications",
        "description": "Show desktop notifications",
        "default": true
      },
      "theme": {
        "type": "select",
        "title": "Theme",
        "description": "Extension theme",
        "default": "auto",
        "options": [
          { "value": "light", "label": "Light" },
          { "value": "dark", "label": "Dark" },
          { "value": "auto", "label": "Auto" }
        ]
      }
    }
  }
}
```

### Setting Types

**Basic Types:**
- **string**: Text input
  ```json
  {
    "type": "string",
    "default": "default value",
    "placeholder": "Enter text...",
    "secret": false
  }
  ```

- **number**: Numeric input
  ```json
  {
    "type": "number", 
    "default": 10,
    "min": 0,
    "max": 100,
    "step": 1
  }
  ```

- **boolean**: Checkbox
  ```json
  {
    "type": "boolean",
    "default": true
  }
  ```

**Advanced Types:**
- **select**: Dropdown selection
  ```json
  {
    "type": "select",
    "default": "option1",
    "options": [
      { "value": "option1", "label": "Option 1" },
      { "value": "option2", "label": "Option 2" }
    ]
  }
  ```

- **multiselect**: Multiple selection
  ```json
  {
    "type": "multiselect",
    "default": ["option1"],
    "options": [...]
  }
  ```

- **file**: File picker
  ```json
  {
    "type": "file",
    "accept": ".json,.txt",
    "directory": false
  }
  ```

**Validation Options:**
- **required**: Must have a value
  ```json
  {
    "required": true
  }
  ```

- **pattern**: Regex validation
  ```json
  {
    "pattern": "^[a-zA-Z0-9]+$",
    "patternError": "Only alphanumeric characters allowed"
  }
  ```

- **secret**: Hide value in UI
  ```json
  {
    "secret": true
  }
  ```

## Advanced Configuration

### Multiple Entry Points

For complex extensions with multiple interfaces:

```json
{
  "rua": {
    "ui": {
      "entry": "dist/index.html"
    },
    "background": {
      "entry": "dist/background.js"
    },
    "actions": [
      {
        "name": "main",
        "title": "Main Interface",
        "mode": "view",
        "entry": "dist/main.html"
      },
      {
        "name": "settings",
        "title": "Settings",
        "mode": "view", 
        "entry": "dist/settings.html"
      }
    ]
  }
}
```

### Conditional Actions

Actions that appear based on context:

```json
{
  "name": "git-status",
  "title": "Git Status",
  "mode": "command",
  "keywords": ["git", "status"],
  "icon": "tabler:git-branch",
  "condition": {
    "fileExists": ".git"
  }
}
```

### Keyboard Shortcuts

Define global shortcuts for your actions:

```json
{
  "rua": {
    "shortcuts": {
      "calculator": "Ctrl+Alt+C",
      "timestamp": "Ctrl+Alt+T"
    }
  }
}
```

## Validation and Testing

### Manifest Validation

Rua automatically validates your manifest:

```bash
# Check manifest validity
rua validate-extension ./my-extension

# Detailed validation output
rua validate-extension ./my-extension --verbose
```

### Common Validation Errors

#### Invalid Extension ID

Extension IDs must be lowercase with hyphens:
```json
// ❌ Invalid
"id": "MyExtension"

// ✅ Valid  
"id": "my-extension"
```

#### Missing Entry Point

Entry points must exist:
```json
// Make sure the file exists
"ui": {
  "entry": "dist/index.html"  // This file must exist
}
```

#### Invalid Permissions

Check permission syntax:
```json
// ❌ Invalid
"permissions": ["invalid-permission"]

// ✅ Valid
"permissions": ["clipboard", "storage"]
```

## Best Practices

### Naming Conventions

- **Extension ID**: Use reverse domain notation (`com.company.extension`)
- **Action names**: Use kebab-case (`search-files`, `copy-timestamp`)
- **Keywords**: Include synonyms and common misspellings

### Performance Optimization

- **Lazy loading**: Only load resources when needed
- **Minimal permissions**: Request only necessary permissions
- **Efficient keywords**: Use specific, relevant keywords

### User Experience

- **Clear titles**: Make action titles descriptive
- **Helpful descriptions**: Explain what each action does
- **Appropriate icons**: Use recognizable, relevant icons

### Security

- **Minimal permissions**: Follow principle of least privilege
- **Input validation**: Validate all user inputs
- **Secure defaults**: Use safe default settings

## Migration Guide

### Updating Manifest Version

When updating your extension:

1. **Increment version** following semver
2. **Update engineVersion** if using new features
3. **Add migration notes** in your README
4. **Test thoroughly** with the new manifest

### Breaking Changes

If making breaking changes:

```json
{
  "version": "2.0.0",
  "rua": {
    "engineVersion": "^0.5.0",
    "migration": {
      "from": "1.x.x",
      "guide": "https://example.com/migration-guide"
    }
  }
}
```

## Examples

### Simple Calculator Extension

```json
{
  "id": "calculator",
  "name": "Calculator",
  "version": "1.0.0",
  "description": "Simple calculator for quick math",
  "rua": {
    "engineVersion": "^0.4.0",
    "ui": {
      "entry": "index.html"
    },
    "actions": [
      {
        "name": "calc",
        "title": "Calculator",
        "mode": "view",
        "keywords": ["calc", "calculator", "math"],
        "icon": "tabler:calculator",
        "query": true,
        "queryPlaceholder": "Enter calculation..."
      }
    ]
  },
  "permissions": ["clipboard"]
}
```

### File Manager Extension

```json
{
  "id": "file-manager",
  "name": "File Manager", 
  "version": "1.2.0",
  "description": "Browse and manage files",
  "rua": {
    "engineVersion": "^0.4.0",
    "ui": {
      "entry": "dist/index.html",
      "width": 800,
      "height": 600,
      "resizable": true
    },
    "background": {
      "entry": "dist/background.js"
    },
    "actions": [
      {
        "name": "browse",
        "title": "Browse Files",
        "mode": "view",
        "keywords": ["files", "browse", "folder"],
        "icon": "tabler:folder"
      },
      {
        "name": "recent",
        "title": "Recent Files",
        "mode": "view", 
        "keywords": ["recent", "history"],
        "icon": "tabler:history"
      }
    ],
    "settings": {
      "defaultPath": {
        "type": "file",
        "title": "Default Directory",
        "directory": true,
        "default": "$HOME"
      },
      "showHidden": {
        "type": "boolean",
        "title": "Show Hidden Files",
        "default": false
      }
    }
  },
  "permissions": [
    {
      "permission": "fs:read",
      "allow": [{ "path": "$HOME/**" }]
    },
    {
      "permission": "fs:read-dir", 
      "allow": [{ "path": "$HOME/**" }]
    },
    "storage"
  ]
}
```

The manifest.json file is your extension's blueprint. Take time to configure it properly, and your extension will integrate seamlessly with Rua's ecosystem.

Commit message:

feat: add ext:// protocol support for footer icon and panel action in footer
- Add path field to ExtensionMeta and ExtensionHostInfo types
- Update extension-server-api to include extension path in getExtensionInfo
- Update ExtensionView and ExtensionViewWrapper to pass extension path
- Add FooterIconRenderer component to support multiple icon formats:
  - ext:// URLs, data URIs, HTTP URLs (rendered as img)
  - SVG strings (rendered with dangerouslySetInnerHTML)
  - Iconify icon names (rendered with Icon component)
  - Emoji/text (rendered as text)
- Add toExtURL helper function in CommandPalette to convert relative paths
- Add onPanelActionEnter callback to Footer component for panel actions
- Update docs with new icon format support and extension metadata fields
- Update create-rua-ext template with new API patterns

apps/docs/content/docs/extensions/manifest.mdx, after:

---
title: Extension Manifest
description: Complete guide to configuring your extension with manifest.json
icon: FileText
---

# Extension Manifest

The `manifest.json` file is the heart of every Rua extension. It defines your extension's metadata, capabilities, permissions, and how it integrates with the Rua ecosystem.

## Basic Structure

Every extension must include a `manifest.json` file in its root directory:

```json
{
  "id": "author.extension-name",
  "name": "My Extension",
  "version": "1.0.0",
  "description": "A helpful extension for Rua",
  "rua": {
    "engineVersion": "^0.4.0",
    "ui": {
      "entry": "dist/index.html"
    },
    "actions": [
      {
        "name": "main",
        "title": "My Action",
        "mode": "view",
        "keywords": ["my", "action"],
        "icon": "tabler:star"
      }
    ]
  },
  "permissions": ["clipboard", "storage"]
}
```

## Required Fields

### Basic Metadata

**Identity Configuration:**
```json
{
  "id": "author.extension-name",
  "name": "My Extension"
}
```

**id**: Unique identifier for your extension
- Format: `author.extension-name` or `extension-name`
- Must be lowercase with hyphens
- Cannot be changed after publication

**name**: Human-readable extension name
- Displayed in the extension manager
- Should be descriptive and concise

**Versioning Configuration:**
```json
{
  "version": "1.0.0"
}
```

**version**: Semantic version number
- Format: `MAJOR.MINOR.PATCH`
- Used for update detection
- Must follow [semver](https://semver.org/) specification

**Description Configuration:**
```json
{
  "description": "A helpful extension for Rua"
}
```

**description**: Brief explanation of what your extension does
- Shown in extension store and manager
- Keep under 100 characters
- Should clearly explain the extension's purpose

### Rua Configuration

The `rua` object contains Rua-specific configuration:

```json
{
  "rua": {
    "engineVersion": "^0.4.0",
    "ui": {
      "entry": "dist/index.html"
    },
    "background": {
      "entry": "dist/init.js"
    },
    "actions": [...],
    "settings": {...}
  }
}
```

#### Engine Version

```json
{
  "engineVersion": "^0.4.0"
}
```

Specifies the minimum Rua version required:
- Use semver ranges (`^0.4.0`, `>=0.4.0`, `~0.4.0`)
- Ensures compatibility with Rua features
- Extensions won't load on incompatible versions

#### UI Configuration

```json
{
  "ui": {
    "entry": "dist/index.html",
    "width": 600,
    "height": 400,
    "resizable": true,
    "theme": "auto"
  }
}
```

**entry**: Path to the main HTML file for view extensions
**width/height**: Default window dimensions (optional)
**resizable**: Whether the extension window can be resized
**theme**: Default theme (`light`, `dark`, `auto`)

#### Background Script

```json
{
  "background": {
    "entry": "dist/init.js",
    "persistent": true
  }
}
```

**entry**: Path to the background script
**persistent**: Whether the script should stay loaded (default: true)

## Actions Configuration

Actions define how users can interact with your extension:

### Basic Action

```json
{
  "name": "search",
  "title": "Search Files",
  "mode": "view",
  "keywords": ["search", "find", "files"],
  "icon": "tabler:search"
}
```

### Action Properties

**Core Properties:**
- **name**: Unique identifier for the action
  - Used internally to identify the action
  - Must be unique within the extension

- **title**: Display name for the action
  - Shown in search results
  - Should be descriptive and concise

- **keywords**: Array of search terms
  - Used for fuzzy matching
  - Include synonyms and related terms

**UI Properties:**
- **icon**: Icon identifier
  - Format: `tabler:icon-name` for Tabler icons
  - Format: `lucide:icon-name` for Lucide icons
  - Custom icons: `./path/to/icon.svg` or `./path/to/icon.png`
  - Data URIs: `data:image/svg+xml;base64,...`
  - Note: Relative paths (starting with `./`) are automatically converted to `ext://` protocol URLs for loading extension assets

- **description**: Optional detailed description
  - Shown in search results
  - Provides additional context

**Behavior Properties:**
- **mode**: How the action behaves
  - `view`: Opens a custom UI
  - `command`: Executes immediately
  - `background`: Runs in background

- **query**: Whether to show query input
  - `true`: Shows input box for user queries
  - `false`: No input (default)

### Action Modes

#### View Mode

Opens a custom user interface:

```json
{
  "name": "calculator",
  "title": "Calculator",
  "mode": "view",
  "keywords": ["calc", "math", "calculator"],
  "icon": "tabler:calculator",
  "query": true
}
```

**Use Cases**:
- Custom search interfaces
- Configuration panels
- Interactive tools
- Data visualization

#### Command Mode

Executes immediately without UI:

```json
{
  "name": "timestamp",
  "title": "Copy Timestamp",
  "mode": "command",
  "keywords": ["time", "timestamp", "date"],
  "icon": "tabler:clock"
}
```

**Use Cases**:
- Quick utilities
- System commands
- Data transformations
- Clipboard operations

#### Background Mode

Runs in the background process:

```json
{
  "name": "monitor",
  "title": "System Monitor",
  "mode": "background",
  "keywords": ["system", "monitor", "stats"],
  "icon": "tabler:activity"
}
```

**Use Cases**:
- System monitoring
- Automated tasks
- Data collection
- Background processing

### Query Support

Enable query input for user-provided data:

```json
{
  "name": "web-search",
  "title": "Search Web",
  "mode": "view",
  "keywords": ["web", "search", "google"],
  "icon": "tabler:world",
  "query": true,
  "queryPlaceholder": "Enter search terms..."
}
```

When `query: true`, users can type before selecting your action:
- The query is passed to your extension
- Listen for `search-change` events in your code
- Use for search, calculations, or any user input

## Permissions System

Permissions control what system APIs your extension can access:

### Simple Permissions

```json
{
  "permissions": [
    "clipboard",
    "notification", 
    "storage",
    "http"
  ]
}
```

### Detailed Permissions

For fine-grained control, use detailed permission objects:

```json
{
  "permissions": [
    "clipboard",
    {
      "permission": "fs:read",
      "allow": [
        { "path": "$HOME/Documents/**" },
        { "path": "$HOME/Downloads/**" }
      ]
    },
    {
      "permission": "shell",
      "allow": [
        {
          "cmd": {
            "program": "git",
            "args": ["status", "log", "diff"]
          }
        }
      ]
    }
  ]
}
```

### Available Permissions

**Basic Permissions:**
- **clipboard**: Read and write clipboard content
  ```json
  "clipboard"
  ```

- **storage**: Local data persistence
  ```json
  "storage"
  ```

- **notification**: Show system notifications
  ```json
  "notification"
  ```

**File System Permissions:**
- **fs:read**: Read files
  ```json
  {
    "permission": "fs:read",
    "allow": [
      { "path": "$HOME/Documents/**" }
    ]
  }
  ```

- **fs:write**: Write files
  ```json
  {
    "permission": "fs:write", 
    "allow": [
      { "path": "$HOME/temp/**" }
    ]
  }
  ```

- **fs:read-dir**: List directory contents
- **fs:exists**: Check if files exist
- **fs:stat**: Get file metadata

**Network Permissions:**
- **http**: Make HTTP requests
  ```json
  {
    "permission": "http",
    "allow": [
      { "url": "https://api.example.com/**" }
    ]
  }
  ```

**System Permissions:**
- **shell**: Execute shell commands
  ```json
  {
    "permission": "shell",
    "allow": [
      {
        "cmd": {
          "program": "echo",
          "args": [".+"]
        }
      }
    ]
  }
  ```

### Path Variables

Use these variables in file system permissions:

- `$HOME`: User's home directory
- `$DESKTOP`: Desktop directory
- `$DOCUMENTS`: Documents directory
- `$DOWNLOADS`: Downloads directory
- `$PICTURES`: Pictures directory
- `$MUSIC`: Music directory
- `$VIDEOS`: Videos directory

## Extension Settings

Define configurable settings for your extension:

```json
{
  "rua": {
    "settings": {
      "apiKey": {
        "type": "string",
        "title": "API Key",
        "description": "Your service API key",
        "default": "",
        "required": true,
        "secret": true
      },
      "maxResults": {
        "type": "number",
        "title": "Maximum Results",
        "description": "Number of results to show",
        "default": 10,
        "min": 1,
        "max": 100
      },
      "enableNotifications": {
        "type": "boolean",
        "title": "Enable Notifications",
        "description": "Show desktop notifications",
        "default": true
      },
      "theme": {
        "type": "select",
        "title": "Theme",
        "description": "Extension theme",
        "default": "auto",
        "options": [
          { "value": "light", "label": "Light" },
          { "value": "dark", "label": "Dark" },
          { "value": "auto", "label": "Auto" }
        ]
      }
    }
  }
}
```

### Setting Types

**Basic Types:**
- **string**: Text input
  ```json
  {
    "type": "string",
    "default": "default value",
    "placeholder": "Enter text...",
    "secret": false
  }
  ```

- **number**: Numeric input
  ```json
  {
    "type": "number", 
    "default": 10,
    "min": 0,
    "max": 100,
    "step": 1
  }
  ```

- **boolean**: Checkbox
  ```json
  {
    "type": "boolean",
    "default": true
  }
  ```

**Advanced Types:**
- **select**: Dropdown selection
  ```json
  {
    "type": "select",
    "default": "option1",
    "options": [
      { "value": "option1", "label": "Option 1" },
      { "value": "option2", "label": "Option 2" }
    ]
  }
  ```

- **multiselect**: Multiple selection
  ```json
  {
    "type": "multiselect",
    "default": ["option1"],
    "options": [...]
  }
  ```

- **file**: File picker
  ```json
  {
    "type": "file",
    "accept": ".json,.txt",
    "directory": false
  }
  ```

**Validation Options:**
- **required**: Must have a value
  ```json
  {
    "required": true
  }
  ```

- **pattern**: Regex validation
  ```json
  {
    "pattern": "^[a-zA-Z0-9]+$",
    "patternError": "Only alphanumeric characters allowed"
  }
  ```

- **secret**: Hide value in UI
  ```json
  {
    "secret": true
  }
  ```

## Advanced Configuration

### Multiple Entry Points

For complex extensions with multiple interfaces:

```json
{
  "rua": {
    "ui": {
      "entry": "dist/index.html"
    },
    "background": {
      "entry": "dist/background.js"
    },
    "actions": [
      {
        "name": "main",
        "title": "Main Interface",
        "mode": "view",
        "entry": "dist/main.html"
      },
      {
        "name": "settings",
        "title": "Settings",
        "mode": "view", 
        "entry": "dist/settings.html"
      }
    ]
  }
}
```

### Conditional Actions

Actions that appear based on context:

```json
{
  "name": "git-status",
  "title": "Git Status",
  "mode": "command",
  "keywords": ["git", "status"],
  "icon": "tabler:git-branch",
  "condition": {
    "fileExists": ".git"
  }
}
```

### Keyboard Shortcuts

Define global shortcuts for your actions:

```json
{
  "rua": {
    "shortcuts": {
      "calculator": "Ctrl+Alt+C",
      "timestamp": "Ctrl+Alt+T"
    }
  }
}
```

## Validation and Testing

### Manifest Validation

Rua automatically validates your manifest:

```bash
# Check manifest validity
rua validate-extension ./my-extension

# Detailed validation output
rua validate-extension ./my-extension --verbose
```

### Common Validation Errors

#### Invalid Extension ID

Extension IDs must be lowercase with hyphens:
```json
// ❌ Invalid
"id": "MyExtension"

// ✅ Valid  
"id": "my-extension"
```

#### Missing Entry Point

Entry points must exist:
```json
// Make sure the file exists
"ui": {
  "entry": "dist/index.html"  // This file must exist
}
```

#### Invalid Permissions

Check permission syntax:
```json
// ❌ Invalid
"permissions": ["invalid-permission"]

// ✅ Valid
"permissions": ["clipboard", "storage"]
```

## Best Practices

### Naming Conventions

- **Extension ID**: Use reverse domain notation (`com.company.extension`)
- **Action names**: Use kebab-case (`search-files`, `copy-timestamp`)
- **Keywords**: Include synonyms and common misspellings

### Performance Optimization

- **Lazy loading**: Only load resources when needed
- **Minimal permissions**: Request only necessary permissions
- **Efficient keywords**: Use specific, relevant keywords

### User Experience

- **Clear titles**: Make action titles descriptive
- **Helpful descriptions**: Explain what each action does
- **Appropriate icons**: Use recognizable, relevant icons

### Security

- **Minimal permissions**: Follow principle of least privilege
- **Input validation**: Validate all user inputs
- **Secure defaults**: Use safe default settings

## Migration Guide

### Updating Manifest Version

When updating your extension:

1. **Increment version** following semver
2. **Update engineVersion** if using new features
3. **Add migration notes** in your README
4. **Test thoroughly** with the new manifest

### Breaking Changes

If making breaking changes:

```json
{
  "version": "2.0.0",
  "rua": {
    "engineVersion": "^0.5.0",
    "migration": {
      "from": "1.x.x",
      "guide": "https://example.com/migration-guide"
    }
  }
}
```

## Examples

### Simple Calculator Extension

```json
{
  "id": "calculator",
  "name": "Calculator",
  "version": "1.0.0",
  "description": "Simple calculator for quick math",
  "rua": {
    "engineVersion": "^0.4.0",
    "ui": {
      "entry": "index.html"
    },
    "actions": [
      {
        "name": "calc",
        "title": "Calculator",
        "mode": "view",
        "keywords": ["calc", "calculator", "math"],
        "icon": "tabler:calculator",
        "query": true,
        "queryPlaceholder": "Enter calculation..."
      }
    ]
  },
  "permissions": ["clipboard"]
}
```

### File Manager Extension

```json
{
  "id": "file-manager",
  "name": "File Manager", 
  "version": "1.2.0",
  "description": "Browse and manage files",
  "rua": {
    "engineVersion": "^0.4.0",
    "ui": {
      "entry": "dist/index.html",
      "width": 800,
      "height": 600,
      "resizable": true
    },
    "background": {
      "entry": "dist/background.js"
    },
    "actions": [
      {
        "name": "browse",
        "title": "Browse Files",
        "mode": "view",
        "keywords": ["files", "browse", "folder"],
        "icon": "tabler:folder"
      },
      {
        "name": "recent",
        "title": "Recent Files",
        "mode": "view", 
        "keywords": ["recent", "history"],
        "icon": "tabler:history"
      }
    ],
    "settings": {
      "defaultPath": {
        "type": "file",
        "title": "Default Directory",
        "directory": true,
        "default": "$HOME"
      },
      "showHidden": {
        "type": "boolean",
        "title": "Show Hidden Files",
        "default": false
      }
    }
  },
  "permissions": [
    {
      "permission": "fs:read",
      "allow": [{ "path": "$HOME/**" }]
    },
    {
      "permission": "fs:read-dir", 
      "allow": [{ "path": "$HOME/**" }]
    },
    "storage"
  ]
}
```

The manifest.json file is your extension's blueprint. Take time to configure it properly, and your extension will integrate seamlessly with Rua's ecosystem.
